Lake Erie Harmful Algal Bloom Forecast

2026-09-25

Summary
The cyanobacteria bloom is present in western Lake Erie but cloud cover or winds above 9.0 mph prevent determining the
area. Imagery from Sep 24 shows the bloom has moved offshore into the center of the western basin, from Monroe to north of
East Sister Island. Some patches may still be present in Maumee Bay. Weekly high resolution imagery of Maumee Bay can
also be found at the Demonstration Great Lakes (20m) HAB Monitoring Page. No recent toxin data currently available for
western Lake Erie. -- Owens, Yu 25 Sep. 2026
The past few days of imagery can be seen at the HAB monitoring site. The Lake Erie Forecast is operated by the National
Centers for Coastal Ocean Science. Contact hab@noaa.gov for technical Questions. Model Last Updated: 2026-09-25 12 PM
EST

Current Lake Erie Sentinel-3 satellite imagery from the Ocean and Land Color Imager (OLCI) on Sep 24, 2026, showing bloom
location and extent in the western basin. Grey indicates clouds or missing data. The estimated threshold of cyanobacteria
detection is 20,000 cells/mL. Inset shows an enhanced truecolor image of the entire lake. Data derived from Copernicus
Sentinel-3.

Wind speed and direction from SouthBassIs, OH. Blooms mix through water column at
wind speeds > 15 knots.
For more information visit: coastalscience.noaa.gov/science-areas/habs/hab-forecasts/lake-erie/

Where the bloom is present in
western Lake Erie, the potential
risk of scum.

Lake Erie Harmful Algal Bloom Forecast

2026-09-25

Forecast surface bloom position for Sep 26, modeled from the last satellite image with water currents estimated from the Lake
Erie Operational Forecast System (LEOFS). Potential for bloom movement is forecast in 3-dimensions with a hydrodynamic
model using satellite imagery and currents. The modeled output does not contain clouds. Black indicates the absence of
chlorophyll and gray indicates area with no data. The arrows show forecasted currents. Water temperature and winds (in
magenta) are the averages for the western basin from the model.

Forecast surface bloom position for Sep 29. Black indicates the absence of chlorophyll and gray indicates area with no data.
The arrows show forecasted currents. Water temperature and winds (in magenta) are the averages for the western basin from
the model.

Additional resources:
●
●
●
●
●

Archived Lake Erie Forecasts
More information
FAQs
Contributors and Data Providers
Lake Erie HAB Forecast Guide
For more information visit: coastalscience.noaa.gov/science-areas/habs/hab-forecasts/lake-erie/

